---
title: "Evading the trap gauntlet: Evidence for the evolution of behavioral trap avoidance in American lobster"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/Lobster-Trap-Gauntlet
excerpt: 'Intensive and prolonged fishing can create selective pressure on the structure of the harvested species’ population. The American lobster has been heavily fished with traps...'
date: 2025-06-05
venue: 'In prep'
slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
citation: 'Jarrett, R. N., II, Reardon, Kathleen M., Steneck, R. S., & Brady, D. C. (2025). Evading the trap gauntlet: Evidence for the evolution of behavioral trap avoidance in American lobster. In prep.'
---

<b>Abstract:</b>
Intensive and prolonged fishing can create selective pressure on the structure of the harvested species’ population. The American lobster has been heavily fished with traps for over 180 years. The fishery has well-developed fisheries-dependent and independent monitoring programs. Size frequency distributions from trap surveys show a precipitous decline of harvestable sizes, while trawl surveys show little to no impact of the fishery. Individual behavioral differences (readily-trapped and trap avoidant lobsters) in the population likely drive these discrepancies between surveys. The fishery removes readily-trapped individuals and selects for trap avoidant lobsters. However, conservation measures that return caught reproductive females to the population (i.e. v-notching) may buffer this selection, by retaining harvestable-sized females in the offshore populations. Our analysis shows that intraspecific interference competition regulating the entry rates of different lobster size classes in ventless and vented traps may play a smaller role than previously thought , instead catch rates are more regulated by trap saturation and population density. From a management perspective, the existence of a trap avoidant subset of the population will result in underestimations of abundance when considering lobster abundances from trap survey data.
