---
title: "Shifts in habitat and demography of American lobster in coastal Maine over the past quarter century"
collection: talks
type: "Invited Oral Presentation"
permalink: /talks/2025-04-08-GOM-Monitoring-Presentation
excerpt: 'The American lobster, <i>Homarus americanus</i>, is among the best studied benthic marine invertebrates in the world having been studied...'
venue: "Gulf of Maine Monitoring and Research Symposium"
date: 2025-04-08
location: "Haverhill, Massachusetts"
---

This was an invited oral presentation the at the Gulf of Maine Monitoring and Research Symposium. 

The American lobster, <i>Homarus americanus</i>, is among the best studied benthic marine invertebrates in the world having been studied and detailed in publications for over 35 years. Our study revisited 20 long-term monitored sites in 2019 and 2021 that were last sampled in 2000. American lobster was known to dwell in shelters and populations being historically concentrated in shelter-providing boulder habitat. Surprisingly, we recorded fundamental changes in lobster habitat use and distribution. Specifically, population densities in boulder habitats and rock shelter occupancy declined in recent years while densities on featureless habitats increased. These demographic changes may be driven by reduced intraspecific competition resulting from lower population densities and declines in smaller size classes. Despite the American lobster being extremely well-studied, it required our in-situ, habitat-specific surveys to document these significant shifts in lobster ecology. Habitat changes at our monitored sites included declines in kelp abundance, increases in diminutive algal turfs, and nearly 3°C warming of benthic water temperature in July (1995–2021), some of which may have contributed indirectly to those shifts. Moreover, these changes in shallow water habitat and demography have implications for the lobster fishery, other lobster population surveys, and stock assessments. 

Authors: Jarrett, R., Brady, D., Steneck, R.

Ph.D. Dissertation Research at the University of Maine
